Diagnostic of Multiple Cardiac Disorders from 12-lead ECGs Using Graph
Convolutional Network Based Multi-label Classification
Zheheng Jiang1 , Tiago P Almeida1 , Fernando S Schlindwein1 , G André Ng1 , Huiyu Zhou1 , Xin Li1
1

University of Leicester, Leicester, UK

Abstract
Automated detection and classification of clinical electrocardiogram (ECG) play a critical role in the analysis
of cardiac disorders. Deep learning is effective for automated feature extraction and has shown promising results
in ECG classification. Most of these methods, however,
assume that multiple cardiac disorders are mutually exclusive. In this work, we have created and trained a novel
deep learning architecture for addressing the multi-label
classification of 12-lead ECGs. It contains an ECG representation work for extracting features from raw ECG
recordings and a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) for
modelling and capturing label dependencies. In the PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2020 [1], our
team, Leicester-Fox, reached a challenge validation score
of 0.395, and full test score of -0.012, placing us 34 out of
41 in the official ranking.

1.

Introduction

The electrocardiogram (ECG) is a clinical tool widely
utilised for the clinical diagnosis of multiple cardiac diseases. The standard 12-lead ECG records resulting electrical activity of the heart collected from different angles,
including six limb leads from the vertical plane and six
chest leads from the horizontal plane [2]. However, manual interpretation of ECG is a time-consuming task, and requires experienced cardiologist [3]. Thus, computer-aided
interpretation has become increasing in the process of clinical diagnosis, since such technique assists the cardiologist
with health care decision making [3].
In traditional approaches, a variety of features are firstly
extracted from ECG recordings using different techniques,
such as Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) [4] and Pan
Tompkins algorithm [5]. Then, a classification method,
such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) [6], Hidden
Markov model (HMM) [7] or random forests [8], is employed for classification. However, these approaches rely
heavily on the carefully selected features, so is difficult
to handle multi-class classification tasks using these ap-

proches [9]. Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently
achieved great success in detecting cardiovascular abnormalities from single-lead or 12-lead ECGs [10, 11]. The
major advantage of DNNs is that they are able to automatically learn useful features from raw input data without
requiring data preprocessing, feature engineering or handcrafted rules [10]. These methods, however, treat the problem of multiple cardiac disease recognition as a multi-class
classification problem, where multiple cardiac abnormalities are regarded as mutually exclusive classes. In reality, it
is possible that more than one cardiac disorders might exist
concurently during the collection of ECG signals. Therefore, further work is needed to identify the correlations
among labels instead of treating each label independently.
In the present work, we sought to 1) develop a novel
end-to-end multi-label cardiac disease detection framework, where a deep CNN model and a bi-directional gated
recurrent unit (GRU) are combined to learn high-level feature representation of ECG, and a GCN is employed to
embed our label graph into inter-dependent cardiac disease classifier which is trained using our proposed classaware Binary Cross-entropy Loss, 2) design a correlation
matrix based on label dependencies to guide the information propagation among nodes in GCN, 3) demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficacy of our architecture on the ECG
dataset of PhysioNet/CinC Challenge 2020 [1].

2.

Model Architecture

Overall framework of our deep learning model is shown
in Fig.1. Our network consists of two modules for multilabel ECG diagnosis. In the first module, a deep 1D CNN
followed by a bi-directional GRU layer was developed
to learn ECG representations. In the second module, a
three-layer GCN model was proposed to learn the interrelationships of labels. Finally a class-aware Binary Crossentropy Loss is proposed to jointly train both networks.

2.1.

ECG representation network

In this module, we firstly applied Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) to learn high-level feature representa-

Figure 1. Overall framework of our deep learning model.
tion of ECG recordings. In order to make CNNs tractable
for optimisation, a Residual Neural Network similar to
[10,11] was adopted to add a shortcut connection that skips
two convolutional layers. The network consists of a convolutional layer (Conv) followed by 16 residual blocks with
two convolutional layers per block. The width of filters is
fixed with 16 in every convolutional layer. The number of
filters per convolutional layer starts with 32, and after the
first four residual blocks, it doubles at the first convolutional layers in every fourth residual block. Every second
residual block subsamples its inputs by a factor of 2. We
applied a Batch Normalisation (BN) for rescaling the output of each convolutional layer and a rectified linear activation unit (RELU) as a nonlinear activation function. The
dropout layers with a rate of 0.2 after RELU were used to
prevent overfitting. A bi-directional GRU layer was finally
applied to extract temporal features from the time series
of CNN feature. We defined the ECG representation network as a mapping function fcnn+GRU and the ECG-level
feature F:
F = fcnn+GRU (E; θcnn+GRU ) ∈ RD

(1)

where θcnn+GRU and D denotes model parameters and the
output dimension of the ECG representation network and
E is an input of 12-ECG recording.

2.2.

GCN based multi-label classification

A novel GCN based model has been used to capture the
label correlations for multi-label classification of cardiac
diseases. GCN was firstly proposed in [12] to generalise
CNNs from regular domain, such as image and speech, to
irregular domains, like irregular graphs. Kipf et al. [13]
also introduced GCN to perform semi-supervised classification on graph-structured data, which was motivated from
a first-order approximation of spectral graph convolutions.
Inspired by these approaches, we sought to implement a
GCN based mapping function to learn label dependencies.
Unlike standard convolutions that operate on data lying on
Euclidean space, the goal of GCN is to learn a function
l
f (·, ·) of feature matrix H l ∈ Rn×d on a graph G, where
n denotes the number of nodes and d indicates the dimensionality of node features. The function f (·, ·) of GCN
layer l takes the feature matrix H l and a representative matrix A of the graph G structure as inputs, and updates the
l+1
node features as H l+1 ∈ Rn×d . Every GCN layer can
then be written as a non-linear function, accordingly:
H l+1 = f (H l , A)

(2)

Following the layer-wise propagation rule of [13]:
f (H l , A) = σ(ÂH l W l )

(3)

l

l+1

where W l ∈ Rd ×d is a weight matrix to be learned and
σ(·) is a non-linear activation function like the RELU. Â
denotes the normalised version of A.
In the present work, stacked GCN layers were used to
learn the inter-relationships of labels. The input of the first
GCN layer is the X ∈ RC×d with C denoting the number of categories and d denoting the dimensionality of the
one-hot label representation. For the last layer, the output
matrix is Z ∈ RC×D , where D is the dimensionality of
the ECG representation.
Eq. 3 shows that the layer-wise propagation of GCN
is based on a normalised matrix Â which describes the
graph structure in a matrix form. To construct matrix Â,
the co-occurrence patterns of labels was mined, and then
a correlation matrix between labels was defined. The label correlation dependency was modelled as the conditional probability. As shown in Fig. 2, each entry (x,y)
of the matrix represents the probability of the occurrence
of label x (along rows) when label y (along column) appears. To calculate the conditional probability in each entry (x,y), the occurrence of label pairs is counted and divided by the occurrence of label y in the training set, i.e.,
P (x|y) = PP(x,y)
(y) .
Binary cross-entropy is widely used for multi-label classification problems, however it evaluates each label independently without considering label correlation [14]. Here,
the output of our GCN network is introduced and a classaware binary cross-entropy loss is defined as follows:

C
X

1
1
)+(1−y c ) log(1−
)
−F ·Z
−F ·Z
1
+
e
1
+
e
c=1
(4)
where y c = {0, 1} denotes the corresponding target binary
value of label c.
L=

2.3.

y c log(

Figure 2. Conditional probability table between nine labels.

3.

Experiment

3.1.

Dataset

The dataset was the one provided by the PhysioNet/CinC Challenge 2020. This dataset was from multiple sources:China Physiological Signal Challenge in 2018
(10330 recordings), St. Petersburg INCART 12-lead Arrhythmia Database (75 recordings), Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt (22386 recordings) and Georgia 12Lead ECG Challenge Database (10344 recordings). Each
ECG recording has one or more labels from different type
of abnormalities in SNOMED-CT codes.

3.2.

Evaluation Metric

The first evaluation metric in the competition is designed to award full credit to correct diagnoses and partial
credit to misdiagnoses. It is calculated as follows:

Training
s = Σij wij aij

All 12-ECG recordings were firstly resampled to a 500
Hz sampling rate. The ECG recordings which are shorter
than 18 seconds were zero-padded. Our network took this
signal as input and output one prediction every 512 samples. The class-aware binary cross-entropy loss between
the predictions and the labels from the training set was applied to optimise our network. Our network was trained for
100 epochs using Adam stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
optimiser with random initialisation of the weights. The
batch size and the learning rate were set to 32 and 0.001
respectively. The learning rate was reduced by a factor
of 10 when the validation loss stopped improving for two
consecutive epochs.

(5)

where aij is the number of recordings in a database that
were classified to class i ∈ C but actually belong to class
j ∈ C. All aij construct a multi-class confusion matrix.
A weight matrix W = [wij ] was pre-defined based on the
similarity of treatments or differences in risks.
Macro-F1 was also adopted as our second evaluation
metric, which is calculated by averaging the F1 values over
all the classes, as shown below:

M acro-F1 =

C
TP
1 X
1
C i=1 T P + 2 (F P + F N )

(6)

where C represents the number of classes (C = 25 in our
case), TP, FP and FN represent the numbers of true positive, false positive and false negative samples respectively.

4.

Results

In the present work, four controlled experiments were
conducted to verify the effectiveness of every component
in our proposed framework including Residual Blocks, bidirectional GRU and GCN. For each experiment, 5-fold
cross-validation was performed on training set. The incremental development of our approach is illustrated in
Table 1. An one dimension CNN (1DCNN) approach
without residual blocks was firstly tested, where the Challenge Metric and F1 score were 0.503 and 0.481. Then
we augmented the CNN architecture with the residual
blocks and increased the Challenge Metric and the F1
score to 0.554 and 0.526. Afterwards, we added the bidirectional GCN and improved the Challenge Metric and
the F1 score further to 0.582 and 0.564. For above three
benchmarks, typically binary cross-entropy loss is applied
to train the whole network. Finally, we introduced GCN
and class-aware binary cross-entropy loss and achieved final Challenge Metric (0.627) and F1 (0.603) score. In the
PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2020, our
team, Leicester-Fox, reached a challenge validation score
of 0.395, and full test score of -0.012, placing us 34 out of
41 in the official ranking.
Table 1. Challenge Metric and F1 score of incremental
development in our approach.
Methods
1DCNN
Res-Blocks
Res-Blocks + Bi-GRU
Res-Blocks+Bi-GRU+GCN

5.

Challenge Metric
0.503
0.554
0.582
0.627

F1 score
0.481
0.526
0.564
0.603

Conclusion

In this paper, we developed a deep neural network architecture for multi-label classification of cardiac abnormalities from 12-lead ECGs. The network contains two
modules: the ECG representation network for learning
high-level feature representation of ECG recordings and
the GCN for capturing the inter-class relationships. Empirical evaluations demonstrated the effectiveness and efficacy of our architecture.

References
[1]

[2]

Alday EAP, Gu A, Shah A, Robichaux C, Wong AKI, Liu
C, Liu F, Rad AB, Elola A, Seyedi S, et al. Classification

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

of 12-lead ECGs: the PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology
Challenge 2020. Physiol. Meas. 2020 (Under review).
Wilson FN, Kossmann CE, Burch GE, Goldberger E, Graybiel A, Hecht HH, Johnston FD, Lepeschkin E, Myers
GB. Recommendations for standardization of electrocardiographic and vectorcardiographic leads. Circulation
1954;10(4):564–573.
Schläpfer J, Wellens HJ. Computer-interpreted electrocardiograms: benefits and limitations. Journal of the American
College of Cardiology 2017;70(9):1183–1192.
Vijayavanan M, Rathikarani V, Dhanalakshmi P. Automatic
classification of ecg signal for heart disease diagnosis using
morphological features. International Journal of Computer
Science Engineering Technology 2014;5(4):449–455.
Korürek M, Doğan B. Ecg beat classification using particle swarm optimization and radial basis function neural network. Expert systems with Applications 2010;
37(12):7563–7569.
Park K, Cho B, Lee D, Song S, Lee J, Chee Y, Kim IY,
Kim S. Hierarchical support vector machine based heartbeat classification using higher order statistics and hermite
basis function. In 2008 Computers in Cardiology. IEEE,
2008; 229–232.
Andreao RV, Dorizzi B, Boudy J. Ecg signal analysis
through hidden markov models. IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical engineering 2006;53(8):1541–1549.
Kropf M, Hayn D, Schreier G. Ecg classification based on
time and frequency domain features using random forests.
In 2017 Computing in Cardiology (CinC). IEEE, 2017; 1–4.
Shah AP, Rubin SA. Errors in the computerized electrocardiogram interpretation of cardiac rhythm. Journal of electrocardiology 2007;40(5):385–390.
Hannun AY, Rajpurkar P, Haghpanahi M, Tison GH, Bourn
C, Turakhia MP, Ng AY. Cardiologist-level arrhythmia
detection and classification in ambulatory electrocardiograms using a deep neural network. Nature medicine 2019;
25(1):65.
Ribeiro AH, Ribeiro MH, Paixão GM, Oliveira DM, Gomes
PR, Canazart JA, Ferreira MP, Andersson CR, Macfarlane
PW, Wagner Jr M, et al. Automatic diagnosis of the 12-lead
ecg using a deep neural network. Nature communications
2020;11(1):1–9.
Defferrard M, Bresson X, Vandergheynst P. Convolutional
neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. In Advances in neural information processing systems.
2016; 3844–3852.
Kipf TN, Welling M.
Semi-supervised classification
with graph convolutional networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv160902907 2016;.
Read J, Pfahringer B, Holmes G, Frank E. Classifier
chains for multi-label classification. Machine learning
2011;85(3):333.

Address for correspondence:
Zheheng Jiang
Informatics, University Rd, Leicester, UK LE1 7RH
zj53@leicester.ac.uk

