MADNN: A Multi-scale Attention Deep Neural Network for Arrhythmia
Classification
Ran Duan, Xiaodong He, Zhuoran Ouyang
Edan Diagnostics ltd., Shenzhen, China
Abstract
The morphological ECG features for arrhythmia
diagnosis are usually identified and combined on different
scales. For example, morphological ECG features can be
identified on the scale of length or amplitude of QRS waves.
Professionals can then make a diagnosis based on the
combination of these identified features. Attention-based
deep neural networks have been proved to boost
meaningful features on different scales and suppress weak
features. To boost and combine ECG features on different
scales for arrhythmia classification, we proposed MADNN:
a multi-scale attention deep neural network for arrhythmia
classification. Our proposed network was designed
combining kernel-wise and branch-wise attention modules
based on a backbone of 1-dimensional convolutional
neural networks. MADNN with properly tuned hyperparameters was tested for arrhythmia classification in the
PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2020. In
this challenge, MADNN officially achieved a validation
score of 0.446, and a full test set score of 0.236. Our team
named Minibus ranked the 18th out of 41 teams.

1.

Introduction

For the diagnosis of arrhythmia, professionals often pay
more attention to relative segments of an
electrocardiogram (ECG) signal and pay less attention to
the others [1]. In deep learning, attention-based deep neural
networks (DNNs) have been introduced to imitate a similar
process [2].
Attention-based DNNs are capable of learning from
global information and identifying features to be focused
on. Essential features are assigned more weights in training,
and useless information is suppressed [3].
Many attention-based DNNs have been validated with
good performances, such as point-wise spatial attention
network [4] and squeeze & excitation module (SENet) [5].
They were designed to apply the attention-based modules
to features on a single-scale (respectively in spatial-wise
and kernel-wise).
State-of-the-art combined-attention DNNs, such as
selective kernel network (SKNet) [6], convolutional block

attention module (CBAM) [7] and split-attention networks
(ResNeSt) [8], explored the potential of combining
attention modules on different scales. These networks
performed better than the reported individual single-scale
attention networks.
Combined-attention modules bring extra model
complexity and increase the need for computational ability
in model inference. The residual modules in Aggregated
Residual Transformations for Deep Neural Networks
(ResNeXt) [9] was designed to reduce the computational
ability and simplify hyper-parameter tuning. ResNeXt was
proved to be a robust backbone network in SKNet.
Although applying a ResNeXt backbone simplify the
network complexity, the kernel-wise attention modules in
SENet were simplified in the ResNeXt-based SKNet.
Unlike SENet, each branch of kernels in a SKNet attention
module was assigned to the same attention weight.
Another multi-scale attention network, ResNeSt, was
recently proved with better performance than SKNet in
image classification. In ResNeSt, the outputs of several
attentive modules were concatenated in kernel-wise.
Attention weights for each kernel were permutated across
different attentive modules, and this added more diversity
to the overall attention weights.
Compared with SKNet, it is difficult to design the
architecture of ResNeSt and tune the hyper-parameters,
especially for a task that is different from image
classification (such as ECG signals classification). This
aroused our attention to design a novel DNN that each type
of attention module can be optimized separately with
diverse attention weights to the outputs of different
convolutional kernels.
Thus, we proposed MADNN: a network sequentially
combines kernel-wise attention modules in SENet and
kernel-selective modules in SKNet. Also, we modified and
tested the proposed model on the task of ECG signal
classification.

2.

Methods

2.1.

Data retrieval

43134 samples were obtained from the PhysioNet

Challenge 2020 [10] [11]. Each sample contained one ECG
signal and one or more corresponding diagnoses. All ECGs
were recorded at the sample rates of 500 Hz or 1000 Hz.
The length of each ECG signal varied from 10 seconds to
30 minutes.
Each ECG record contained one or more diagnoses,
including normality and 111 types of abnormalities. 27
types of diagnoses were labeled in our study because they
were scored in the PhysioNet Challenge 2020.

2.2.

Data preprocessing

The fully-connected layers in our DNN required a fixedsize input. The input signals were resampled to a fixed
sample rate at 500 Hz and padded to a fixed length of
30000 sample points.
First, fast Fourier transform was applied to resample all
signals to 500hz. All signals were then padded to 60
seconds. The signals which was shorter than 60 seconds
were copied end to end to the length of 60 seconds. On the
contrary, the signals longer than 60 seconds were truncated
to the length of 60 seconds from the end.
All samples were then randomly shuffled and split into
a training set, a validation set, and a testing set
(respectively 80%, 10%, and 10% of the total).

2.3.

Data augmentation

To increase the randomness and reduce overfitting, we
randomly cropped each padded signal (Figure 1) after

signal padding. In detail, 60 sample points were reserved
at the beginning of a signal as the starting interval, and the
last 60 sample points of the signal were reserved as the
ending interval for random cropping.

Figure 1. The process of random cropping.
When preparing each batch of inputs, a uniformly
distributed random variable was generated ranged from 0
to 60. We cropped the random variable of sample points
from the beginning of the starting interval. Similarly, 60
minus the random variable of sample points were cropped
from the end of the ending interval.
To avoid the imbalance contribution of different labeled
classes (imbalance update of weights in DNN neurons),
focal loss [12] was adopted as our loss function in the
process of model training.
Also, a balance factor for each label group was
calculated according to Formula 1 (Wi denoted the
extraction weight of class I; μ denoted the number of
samples in total; μi denoted the mean number of samples
labeled as class i). Before feeding a sample to our model,
a random float ranged from 0 to 1 was generated. If the
generated float was smaller than the corresponding balance

Figure 2. Comparison of SE Module (a), SK module (b), and our proposed multi-scale attention module (c). FC
denoted a full-connected layer.

factor, the sample would be skipped for training.
𝑊𝑖 =

2.4.

2𝜇𝑖
𝜇

2.5.

Training Methodology

(Formula 1)

DNN architecture

A customized multi-scale attention module was
proposed in our study to combine features on different
scales. A kernel-wise attention module (Figure 2-a) from
SE modules and a branch-wise attention module (Figure 2b) from SKNet were combined and modified into a multiscale attention module (Figure 2-c). In each multi-scale
attention module, a kernel-wise attention module was
attached to the end of a branch-wise attention module.
For the purpose of extracting features from 1dimensional signals, the original 2-dimensional CNNs in
SENet and SKNet were modified to 1-dimensional CNNs
correspondingly. Inspired by ResNeXt, each branch of
convolutional layers in the proposed multi-scale attention
module shared the same kernel size. The kernel size was
changed to 3 from 7 in the stem convolutional layers in
comparison to ResNeXt. Applying convolutional layers
with large kernel size will supress the features of highfrequency in ECG signals.
Overall, MADNN consisted of a stem module in
ResNeXt, four modified multi-scale attention modules
attached one by another, a global averaged pooling layer,
and a fully-connected output layer (Figure 3).

Model weights were updated based on the binary crossentropy loss for each label. The model was trained with an
Adam [13] optimizer of an initial learning rate of 0.0001,
beta1 of 0.9, beta2 of 0.999, and epsilon of 1e-08. The
learning rate was automatically multiplied with a reduction
factor of 0.5 when the validation loss has stopped
improving for 5 epochs.
A dropout layer with a 0.1 dropout rate was attached to
each multi-scale attention module to avoid overfitting.
When training each batch of data, 10% of the weights in its
previous convolutional layer were randomly selected not
to be updated. The dropout rate in our study was set to a
smaller value compared with the dropout rate of 0.2 in
ResNeSt. This is mainly because a moderate strategy was
preferred for medical image classification.
The training was stopped after the validation loss
stopped optimizing for 20 epochs. An optimal model was
carefully selected from models in the 20 epochs based on
the validation result.

2.6.

Ensemble learning

We also implemented an Xgboost [14] classifier to
aggregating the predictions from an ensemble of the
optimized MADNN, an Xception model [15], and a
customized VGG-liked model [16] (Figure 4). All
individual models were trained on the same challenge data.

Figure 4. The workflow of ensemble learning.
Figure 3. The overall architecture of MADNN.

In specific, the Xgboost classifier was designed under a
random search [17] of several hyper-parameters: the

number of estimators ranged from 80 to 200 in 4 trails; the
learning rate ranged from 0.001 to 2 in 20 trails; the
subsample ranged from 0.6 to 0.9 in 20 trails; the feature
sample rate by column ranged from 0.5 to 0.98 in 10 trails;

3.

Results and discussion

MADNN without ensemble learning was tested on the
hidden datasets in the PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology
Challenge 2020. Scores were calculated according to a new
scoring metric that awards partial credit to misdiagnoses as
cardiologists [10]. The MADNN officially achieved a
validation score of 0.446. It was also tested on a full hidden
test set and officially achieved a score of 0.236. Our
official score ranked 18th out of the scores of 41 teams in
this challenge (our team named Minibus in the challenge).
The ensemble classifier was tested on the local testing
set, which is split by cross-validation. The training score
was 0.6 higher than the score of independent MADNN.
The ensemble classifier was not submitted and tested on
the hidden testing set because its inference speed was
relatively low.
In this study, we addressed the potential of a simple
solution to combining attention modules on different scales.
The model performed good in the challenge, but more tests
could be implemented in future works to compare the
performance of MADNN with other similar DNNs.
Also, label smoothing and stacking ensemble are
potential optimization methods. Regarding the limited
computational ability of ECG machines, an extension for
MADNN could be simplifying the current model.

References
[1] Vecht R, Gatzoulis MA, Peters N, “ECG diagnosis in clinical
practice,” Springer Science & Business Media, 2009, pp 67111.
[2] Schlemper J, Oktay O, Schaap M, Heinrich M, Kainz B,
Glocker B, Rueckert D, “Attention gated networks: Learning
to leverage salient regions in medical images,” Medical
Image Analysis, Apr, 2019, pp. 197-207.
[3] Vig JA, “multiscale visualization of attention in the
transformer model,” arXiv preprint, arXiv:1906.05714, Jun,
2019.
[4] Zhao H, Zhang Y, Liu S, Shi J, Change Loy C, Lin D, Jia J,
“Psanet: Point-wise spatial attention network for scene
parsing,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 267-283.
[5] Hu J, Shen L, Sun G, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 7132-7141.
[6] Li X, Wang W, Hu X, Yang J, “Selective kernel networks,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 510-519.
[7] Woo S, Park J, Lee JY, So Kweon I. “Cbam: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proceedings of the European

Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 3-19.
[8] Zhang H, Wu C, Zhang Z, Zhu Y, Zhang Z, Lin H, Sun Y, He
T, Mueller J, Manmatha R, Li M, “Resnest: Split-attention
networks,” arXiv preprint, arXiv:2004.08955, Apr, 2020.
[9] Xie S, Girshick R, Dollár P, Tu Z, He K, “Aggregated residual
transformations for deep neural networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 1492-1500.
[10] Perez Alday EA, Gu A, Shah A, Robichaux C, Wong AKI,
Liu C, Liu F, Rad BA, Elola A, Seyedi S, Li Q, Sharma A,
Clifford GD, Reyna MA, “Classification of 12-lead ECGs:
the PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2020,”
Physiol. Meas., 2020 (Under Review).
[11] Goldberger A, Amaral L, Glass L, Hausdorff J, Ivanov PC,
Mark R, Mietus JE, Moody GB, Peng CK, Stanley HE,
“PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components
of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,”
Circulation [Online]. 101 (23), pp. e215–e220.
[12] Lin TY, Goyal P, Girshick R, He K, Dollár P, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp.
2980-2988.
[13] Kingma DP, Ba J, “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization,” arXiv preprint, arXiv:1412.6980, Dec, 2014.
[14] Chen T, Guestrin C, “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting
system,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, Aug, 2016, pp. 785-794.
[15] Chollet F, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise
separable convolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2017, pp. 1251-1258.
[16] Simonyan K, Zisserman A, “Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint,
arXiv:1409.1556, Sep, 2014.
[17] Bergstra J, Bengio Y, “Random search for hyper-parameter
optimization,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
Feb, 2012, pp. 281-305.

Address for correspondence:
Ran Duan.
No.15 Jinhui Rd.,
Shenzhen, 518122,
P.R.China
413677671@qq.com

