Automatic Detection and Classification of 12-lead ECGs Using a Deep Neural
Network
Wenxiao Jia 1, Xian Xu 1, Xiao Xu 1, Yuyao Sun1, Xiaoshuang Liu1
1

Ping An Health Technology, Beijing China

Abstract
The objective of the PhysioNet/Computing in
Cardiology Challenge 2020 is to identify clinical
diagnoses from 12-lead ECG recordings. We developed an
end-to-end deep neural network model to classify 27
scored clinical diagnosis from Electrocardiogram (ECG).
The Squeeze and Excitation (SE) layer, which can
explicitly model channel-interdependencies within
modules and selectively enhance useful features and
suppress less useful ones, and ResNet are integrated into
a deep neural network, which is called SE-ResNet34 in our
paper. We use the one- dimensional convolution to extract
the features among different 12-lead ECG channels and
the convolution network is a standard 34-layers ResNet.
Finally, we also concatenate some demographic features
from the ECGs and the deep features from the SEResNet34 to identify clinical diagnosis. The evaluation
metrics is calculated, which assigns different weights to
different classes, according to the similarity between
different classes. Our team named PALab ranked 10 out of
41 teams in the official ranking and achieved a challenge
validation score of 0.653 and full test score of 0. 359.
If confirmed in clinical settings, this approach could
reduce the rate of misdiagnosed computerized ECG
interpretations and improve the efficiency of expert human
ECG interpretation.

1.

Introduction

The 12-lead ECG plays a critical role in the clinical
diagnoses, including varieties of arrhythmias and other
cardiac abnormalities. The early detection and
classification of cardiac abnormalities can tremendously
increase the chance of successful treatment.
Automatic detection and classification of cardiac
abnormalities can assist physicians in the diagnosis of the
growing number of ECG recorded. Over the last decade,
there have been increasing numbers of attempts to identify
12-lead ECG clinical diagnosis, mainly including a variety
of traditional machine learning methods, requiring
extensive data pre-processing, feature engineering or
handcrafted rules[1-2]. However, substantial algorithms

have gained more attention by a specific class of models
known as deep neural networks (DNN) in the past five
years. Many of these algorithms have the potential for
more accurate identification of cardiac abnormalities[3-6].
DNN consists of multiple processing layers, with each
layer being able to learn increasingly abstract, higher-level
representations of the input data relevant to specific tasks,
which makes them particularly well suited to interpret
ECG. Therefore, some authors integrate features from
domain knowledge into DNN model to obtain a better
accuracy and interpretation [7-8].
The lack of appropriate data and well-defined
evaluation has limited generalizability of automatic
interpretation algorithm for 12-lead ECGs [9]. Much of the
previous work used data from single, small, or relatively
homogeneous datasets, which is limited by the small
number of patients and rhythm episodes present in the
dataset. These models perform well on the training set, but
often fail to perform well on the external test set. The
PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2020
provides an opportunity to address this problem by
providing data from a wide set of sources. This paper
attempt to design a robust model that automatically
identify the cardiac abnormality in each 12-lead ECG
recording by using the challenge ECG data [10].
In this study, we developed a DNN model, more
specifically SE-ResNet34, to identify 27 scored clinical
diagnosis from raw 12-lead ECG using four different
training dataset consisting of 43101 patients. In summary,
we demonstrate that end-to-end deep learning approach
can classify a broad range of distinct arrhythmias from 12lead ECGs. If confirmed in clinical settings, we believe
that this approach has the potential to improve the accuracy,
efficiency, and scalability of ECG interpretation.

2.

Methods

2.1.

Datasets Reprocessing

Our research is based on the data from
PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2020.
Figure 1. shows a typical example of 12-lead ECG data
with atrial fibrillation (AF). As we can see, AF is an
abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) characterized by the

rapid and irregular beating of the atrial chambers of the
heart.

In this study, PVC and VPB, CRBBB and RBBB，PAC
and SVPB are classified as the same type of diagnosis.

2.2.

Figure 1. Typical example of raw 12-lead ECG with atrial
fibrillation.
We ignored the INCART dataset which only has 74
recordings of 30 minutes. In the remained datasets, each
recording has an uncertain length ranging from 6 to 60
seconds, which is sampled at 500Hz. For convenient model
training with non-identical length of ECG recordings, each
recoding has been truncated into length of 10 seconds
(5000 sample points). In addition, if the data sampling
frequency is not 500Hz, we should resample the data into
500Hz. As showed Figure 2, if the length of original
recording was less than 5000 points, we padded the
recording into 5000 points by assigning zero values in the
end of data. If the length of original recording was longer
than 5000 points, we truncated the recording into 5000
points by discarding values in the end of data.

Model development

A 34-layer ResNet was developed for the ECG
classification task (Figure 3). In order to improve the
efficiency of traditional CNN, the design includes 17
sequential skip connections [11]. In each block, the same
operations were performed. As shown in Figure 2, the
modules consist of one-dimensional convolutional (1D
Conv) layers, batch normalization (BN) layers, rectified
linear units (Relu) of activation layer and SE layer.
The convolution layer was the major feature learning
component of the CNN, which involved a 7x1 filter with
trainable weights that sliding across the signals to extract
features from the waveform. When significant features
were detected, the filters were activated by adapting the
weights. Providing the labelled data, the model was able to
learn the significant features that represented different
diagnosis classes.

Figure 2. Preprocessing of different data lengths

Figure 3. The overall structure of the neural network
architecture with repeated 34 1D convolution with skip
connections

A typical ECG heartbeat is characterized by a recurrent
sequence of waves including P, QRS and T waves which
represent the depolarization of the atria and ventricles,
followed by repolarization of the ventricles. In this study,
the ECG signals have not been filtered in the preprocessing stage because of two main factors. On one hand,
in this database, all the 12 leads recordings are used and
the amount of the data is large. Using the original data
rather than filtering them, the computation cost is
significantly reduced. On the other hand, as mentioned
above, most of arrhythmia detection algorithms have
applied filtering to process ECG signals [1-2]. However, in
this study, the proposed model shows good performance in
anti-noise interference due to no filtering, demonstrating a
potential for practical applications.

Each learned filter was operated with a local receptive
field, so that each unit of the transformation output was
unable to exploit contextual information outside of this
region. In order to tackle the issue of exploiting channel
dependencies, we added SE layer (Squeeze-and-Excitation
block)[12].
Firstly, we squeezed global spatial information into a
channel descriptor by using global average pooling to
generate channel-wise statistics. Formally, a statistic 𝑧 ∈
ℝ$ was generated by shrinking 𝒰 through spatial
dimensions 𝐻 × 𝑊 , where the c-th element of 𝑧 is
calculated by :
: 6
1
𝑧) = 𝐹,- (𝑢) ) =
2 2 𝑢) (𝑖, 𝑗)
<1=
𝐻×𝑊
;89 789

Here 𝒰 = [u9 , u@ , … , uB ] was the output of previous layer,
𝒰 ∈ ℝ:×D×$ . The transformation output 𝒰 could be
interpreted as a collection of the local descriptors, which
were expressive for the whole signal.
Secondly, to make use of the information aggregated in
the squeeze operation and fully capture channel-wise
dependencies, we employed a simple gating mechanism
with a sigmoid activation. It could learn a non-mutuallyexclusive relationship since we would like to ensure that
multiple channels were allowed to be emphasized opposed
to one-hot activation:
𝑠 = 𝐹FG (𝑧, 𝑊) = 𝜎<𝑔(𝑧, 𝑊)= = 𝜎<𝑊@ 𝛿(𝑊9 𝑧)= <2=
L

where 𝛿 refers to the Relu function, 𝑊9 ∈ ℝM×$ and 𝑊@ ∈
L

ℝ$× M , 𝑟 = 16. To limit model complexity and enhance
generalization, we parameterized the gating mechanism by
forming a bottleneck with two fully connected (FC) layers
around the non-linearity, i.e. a dimensionality-reduction
layer with parameters 𝑊9 with reduction ratio r, a ReLU
and then a dimensionality increasing layer with parameters
𝑤@ .The final output of the block was obtained by rescaling
the transformation output 𝒰 with the activations:
𝑋R) = 𝐹,)STF (𝑢) , 𝑠) ) = 𝑠) ∙ 𝑢)
<3=
where 𝑋R = [𝑥X9 , 𝑥X@ , … , 𝑥X) ] and 𝐹,)STF (𝑢) , 𝑠) ) refers to
channel-wise multiplication between the feature map 𝑢) ∈
ℝ:×D and the scalar 𝑠) .
In order to integrate the demographic information, we
also concatenate the age and sex with the features from
convolution layers. Following this, a fully connected layer
was used to transform the features to a 27x1 vector of
numerical values, which corresponded to the outputs for
each class. A sigmoid function was used to represent these
values as a probability by normalizing them between 0 and
1. The network took segments of length of 10 seconds as
input, and produced a prediction for each segment. The
model output was a probability for each class, and the
predicted class was the one which probability greater than
threshold.
We randomly divided the model development data into
two parts: 80% for model training, and 20% for internal
validation. The validation set was used to tune the
parameters. We implemented all the models with Pytorch
1.1, and trained them on machines with NVIDIA TESLA
P100 GPUs. The adaptive momentum estimation (Adam)
optimizer, with a learning rate of 0.001, was used to
optimize the network parameters.

2.3.

Baseline Model

In order to compare model performance for different
parameters setting, we also designed several baseline
models. Inspired by the concept that the more network
layers, the better model performance, we designed the
ResNet50 model, which is same as ResNet34 model but
with 50 layers. In addition, we also utilize LightGBM

classifiers to identify clinical diagnosis. Firstly, we
extracted features from ResNet50 model, including the last
layer and penultimate layer of the network layer. Then we
concatenated these features as the final features. Finally,
these features were feed into the input for the LightGBM
classifiers.

2.4.

Evaluation metrics

The challenge metric awards partial credit to
misdiagnoses that result in similar outcomes as the true
diagnosis as judged by cardiologists. It originates from the
institution that some misdiagnoses are more harmful than
others and should be scored accordingly. Moreover, it
reflects the fact that confusing some classes is much less
harmful that confusing other classes. Figure 4 shows the
Reward matrix W for the diagnoses scored in the
Challenge.

Figure 4. The Reward matrix W for the diagnoses scored
in the Challenge, where columns are the true label and
columns and rows are the predicted label

3.

Result

For this year’s Challenge, organizers developed a new
scoring metric that awards partial credit to misdiagnoses
that result in similar outcomes or treatments as the true
diagnoses as judged by our cardiologists. The predicted
performance of different methods on intermediate
validation set are illustrated in Table 1. As we can see, the
SE-Resnet34 shows model outperformance (0.653)
compared with other methods. In addition, the SE layer is
critical for clinical diagnosis of 12-lead ECG. Table 2.
shows the final testing set result of our model (SEResnet34) in the official phase, where the challenge score
is 0.359 on full test set.

Table 1. The performance of different methods on
intermediate validation set.
Model
Rsenet50
Rsenet50+lgb
Resnet34
SE-Resnet34

AUC
0.938
0.951
0.959
0.967

Challenge Score
0.594
0.624
0.630
0.653

Table 2. The model performance on the testing set in the
official phase
Model
Test Database 1 Score
Test Database 2 Score
Test Database 3 Score
Full Test Set Score

4.

Challenge Score
0.836
0.623
0.144
0.359

Discussion

We proposed a new deep learning model named SEResNet34 to identify 27 clinical diagnosis from 12-lead
ECGs. The model showed perfect classification
performance on the PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology
Challenge 2020. Specifically, SE-ResNet34 achieved high
and stable performance score measured by challenge
metric (0.359) in the full test set. Considering the fact that
manual interpretation of the electrocardiogram is timeconsuming, and requires skilled personnel with a high
degree of training, this model can easily be applied to assist
the cardiology doctors to identify the clinical diagnosis.
It can be inferred that the challenge score is related to
the incidence rates of each class, which is also proved in
our previous study [13]. Therefore, given a set of clinical
diagnosis with different incidence rate, we can adjust the
cut-off value to dichotomize their predicted likelihoods for
better challenge score. Considering the incidence rates
significantly change over different classes, using different
cutoffs may have a better potential to lead to better total
utility score, which has been validated in our validation set.
However, it is a little improvement in hidden testing set,
which is probably overfitted in validation set and needs
further confirmation in the future.
Although SE-ResNet34 model can provide accurate
classification of 12-lead ECGs, it still has some limitations.
The generalization and stability of the proposed model
needs to be systematically evaluated with more data in
clinical reality.

References
[1] Kropf M, Hayn D, Schreier G. ECG classification based on
time and frequency domain features using random forests.
2017 Computing in Cardiology (CinC). IEEE, 2017: 1-4.
[2] Smíšek R, Hejč J, Ronzhina M, et al. SVM based ECG

classification using rhythm and morphology features, cluster
analysis and multilevel noise estimation. 2017 Computing in
Cardiology (CinC). IEEE, 2017: 1-4.
[3] Awni, Y, Hannun et al. Cardiologist-level arrhythmia
detection
and
classification
in
ambulatory
electrocardiograms using a deep neural network. J. Nature
Medicine, 2019.
[4] Attia Z I , Kapa S , Lopez-Jimenez F , et al. Screening for
cardiac contractile dysfunction using an artificial
intelligence–enabled electrocardiogram. Nature medicine,
2019, 25(1):70-74.
[5] Attia Z I, Noseworthy P A, Lopez-Jimenez F, et al. An
artificial intelligence-enabled ECG algorithm for the
identification of patients with atrial fibrillation during sinus
rhythm: a retrospective analysis of outcome prediction. The
Lancet, 2019, 394(10201): 861-867.
[6] Raghunath S, Cerna A E U, Jing L, et al. Prediction of
mortality from 12-lead electrocardiogram voltage data using
a deep neural network. Nature Medicine, 2020: 1-6.
[7] Hong S , Xiao C , Ma T , et al. MINA: Multilevel knowledgeguided attention for modeling electrocardiography signals.
Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence IJCAI-19. 2019.
[8] Li X, Qian B, Wei J, et al. Domain knowledge guided deep
atrial fibrillation classification and its visual interpretation.
Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management. 2019: 129-138.
[9] Strodthoff N , Wagner P , Schaeffter T , et al. Deep learning
for ECG analysis: benchmarks and insights from PTB-XL.
2020.
[10]Erick
A.
Perez Alday,
Annie Gu, Amit Shah,
Chad Robichaux,
An-Kwok Ian
Wong,
Chengyu Liu, Feifei Liu,Ali Bahrami Rad, Andoni Elola, S
alman Seyedi, Qiao Li, Ashish Sharma, Gari D. Clifford,
Matthew A. Reyna. Classification of 12-lead ECGs:
the PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge
2020. Physiol. Meas.
[11] He K, Zhang X, Ren S, et al. Deep residual learning for
image recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016: 770-778.
[12] Hu J , Shen L , Albanie S , et al. Squeeze-and-excitation
networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2017.
[13] Li X, Xu X, Xie F, et al. A Time-phased machine learning
model for real-time prediction of sepsis in critical care.
Critical Care Medicine, 2020.
Address for correspondence: No.1-3 Xinyuan South Road,
Chaoyang District, Beijing, China
My Name: Wenxiao Jia
My E-mail address:jiawenxiao502@pingan.com.cn

