Automatic 12-lead ECG Classification Using Deep Neural Networks
Wenjie Cai, Shuaicong Hu, Jingying Yang, Jianjian Cao
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
Abstract
ECG is the most commonly used diagnostic tool for
identifying cardiovascular disease. However, manual
interpretation of ECG is inefficient and requires medical
practitioners with a lot of training. In this work we
proposed two deep learning models to classify ECG
automatically. One model had a hybrid architecture of
convolutional neural network and recurrent neural
network. The other model contained deep residual neural
networks. The output layer of both models was activated
by a sigmoid function to get classification results. We
manually located all the premature beats in each ECG
recording and selected 10 s segments which contained at
least one premature beat as training samples. Recordings
without premature beats were randomly split into 10 s
segments. The models were then trained on these ECG
segments for 30 epochs with an optimizer of Adam. After
training, the model performance was evaluated on the
hidden validation set and test set maintained by the
challenge organizers. Our team, nebula, achieved a
challenge validation score of 0.526, and full test score of
0.109, but was not ranked due to omissions in the
submission. The results show potential application value
in automatically classifying 12-lead ECG.

1.

Introduction

Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are the number one
cause of death in the world, killing more than 17 million
lives each year [1]. Electrocardiogram (ECG), reflecting
the electrical activity of the heart, is the preferred method
for screening and diagnosing CVD. The standard ECG has
12 leads and provides more diagnostic information than
single lead ECG. Six of the leads are called “limb leads”
which show information of electrical activity transmission
on the coronal plane. The other six leads are called “chest
leads” which show electrical transmission in the transverse
plane. The doctor makes a diagnostic conclusion by
checking the ECG beat by beat and lead by lead. The ECG
interpretation process is time consuming and tedious, and
it is prone to errors. Computerized interpretation of ECG
based on expert systems can reduce the workloads but it
was reported to have a 5.8% higher error rate than average
cardiologists [2]. So more advanced algorithms are

required for automated ECG interpretation.
Recently, deep learning has achieved great success in
computer vision, natural language processing and speech
recognition. With this cutting edge technique, researchers
have explored many methods for automatic ECG
classification [3-9]. These methods mainly involve
convolutional neural networks (CNN), recurrent neural
networks (RNN), or a combination of both. Hannun et al.
developed a deep residual neural network to classify
single-lead ECG into 12 classes [3]. Their model got more
accurate results than average cardiologists. Faust et al.
proposed an LSTM model to detect atrial fibrillation and
achieved 98.51% accuracy [8]. Xiong et al. used 21-layer
convolutional recurrent neural network to classify single
lead ECGs in the 2017 PhysioNet/CinC Challenge and got
F1 score of 0.82, which is among the best scores [9].
However, there are still few studies on the classification of
12-lead ECG. This may be due to the lack of appropriate
database of 12-lead ECG. The PhysioNet/Computing in
Cardiology Challenge 2020 provides more than 43,000
ECG recordings with diagnostic labels [10]. This study
aims to develop an automated method for classifying
cardiac abnormalities from 12-lead ECGs.

2.

Methods

2.1.

Data preprocessing

Data values of all recordings were divided by their
corresponding amplitude resolutions with the unit of mV.
Then all samples were resampled to 500 Hz with fast
Fourier transformation. Each lead of every recording was
subtracted by its mean value. There are some abnormal
spikes [11] with the values greater than 20 mV in the
recordings from the dataset of China Physiological Signal
Challenge in 2018 (CPSC2018). These spikes were
examined and replaced with normal values next to them.

2.2.

Data relabeling

Some labels were considered as the same diagnosis
according to scoring algorithm provided by the challenge
organizer. Complete right bundle branch block (CRBBB)
and right bundle branch block (RBBB) were merged as

Figure 1. The architecture of Model 1. The tensor dimensions of layer’s output are shown and t denotes the
samples of the input ECG.

Figure 2. The architecture of Model 2. The tensor
dimensions of layer’s output are shown and t denotes the
samples of the input ECG.

Figure 3. The architecture of Res-SENet. The letter s means
strides.

RBBB. Premature atrial contraction (PAC) and
supraventricular premature beats (SVPB) were merged as
PAC. Ventricular ectopics (VEB) belongs to unscored
label, but it has the same medical meaning with Premature
ventricular contractions (PVC) and ventricular premature
beats (VPB). So these three labels were merged together as
PVC. For each unscored label, if the total number of ECG
samples with this label was less than 300, we removed this
label from all recordings.

to the sample classifier which provided by the challenge
organizer. Briefly, all the ECG recordings were band-pass
filtered between 0.5-15 Hz to remove baseline wandering
and some noise. Then ECG peaks were detected based on
Pan-Tomkins algorithm [12]. The statistical features about
the peak values and peak intervals including mean, median,
standard deviation, variance, skewness, kurtosis were
calculated. We extracted features from lead I, II, III and got
12 features from each lead. Counting age and gender, each
recording generated a total of 38 characteristics.

2.3.

2.5.

Premature beats locating

For PAC or PVC, the premature beat may only occur
once in a very long recording. So we manually located all
the premature beats and used segments that contained at
least one premature beat for training.

2.4.

Feature extraction

The feature extraction process was carried out according

Deep learning models architecture

Two models were proposed in this study. The first
model consists of five CNN layers, three max pooling
layers, two stacked bidirectional GRU layers and two fully
connected layers (Fig. 1). Sigmoid was used as the
activation function in the last layer and Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU) was used elsewhere. The second model had
two parallel residual neural networks and each used the
residual neural network (ResNet) block as a basic block

(Fig. 2). Each parallel Residual neural network contains 1
CNN layer and 6 ResNet blocks, and the last 4 blocks used
Squeeze-and-Excitation networks (SENet) to pay more
attention to meaningful feature channels (Fig. 3). The
outputs of ResNet blocks were compressed by using a
global average pooling layer and a global max pooling
layer simultaneously. The last layer used a fully connected
layer with sigmoid as activation function. For both models,
their input dimensions were not fixed at a certain number,
so both models accepted ECG data with variable lengths.

2.6.

Model training

The challenge data were randomly shuffled and 80% of
the data were put into the training set and the remaining
were used as our own test set. Our models were trained
with the training set using 5-fold cross validation strategy.
Although our models accepted data with various length,
data with fixed length can take the most advantage of
parallel processing power of GPU and reduce a lot of
training time. Thus, we used 10 s segments for training in
this study. If a recording was labelled as PAC or PVC, the
segments that contained at least one premature beat were
used. For other recordings, the segments were randomly
chosen. These segments were further processed for data
augmentation on the fly. Data augmentation techniques
included adding random Gaussian noise, combining a
random sinusoidal signal [13] and shifting random baseline.
The models were trained using Adam algorithm with the
learning rate set between 1e-3 and 1e-4. Total epochs were
set at 30.

Table 1. Performance of proposed models on our own
test set.
Methods
Model 1
Model 2
Ensemble
XGBoost

Challenge Score
0.534
0.558
0.560
0.546

Table 2. Performance of proposed models on the
official validation set.
Methods
Ensemble
XGBoost

Challenge Score
0.526
0.517

Table 3. Performance of the ensemble model on the
official test set.
Test set
Database 1
Database 2
Database 3
All

Challenge Score
0.736
0.086
0.052
0.109

Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) is an optimized
decision trees based gradient boosting framework [14]. We
trained 24 XGBoost classifiers to predict all the scored
labels with normal features and deep features. Specifically,
deep features included the output of the second last layer
of the first model and the output of the last layer of the
second model.

on our own test set. As shown in Table 1, the best method
was the ensemble model which combined the decisions of
model 1 and model 2. It had a challenge score of 0.560.
XGBoost classifier had a challenge score of 0.546 which
was lower than that of model 2 and ensemble model.
The models’ performance was further evaluated on the
hidden validation set. As shown in Table 2, the ensemble
model got a challenge score of 0.526 and XGBoost
classifier had a challenge score of 0.517.
Finally, the ensemble model was evaluated on the
official full test set. As shown in Table 3, the model
received challenge scores of 0.736, 0.086 and 0.052 from
three test databases respectively. And our team got the final
challenge score of 0.109.

2.8.

4.

2.7.

XGBoost classifier

Model inference

The ECG recordings were pre-processed as described at
section 2.1. Then the data were fed into the deep learning
models. The average values of two models’ outputs were
used to make a classification with threshold set at 0.5. If
XGBoost classifiers were used, normal features and deep
features were fed into 24 separate XGBoost classifiers to
make predictions for 24 scored labels.

3.

Results
After models training, we evaluated their performance

Discussion and Conclusions

The results shown in Section 3 indicate that the model
with deeper layers is more effective in classifying ECG
abnormality than the model with shallower layers. Model
1 is simple and contains 5 CNN layers with a small
receptive field. It can’t extract and identify complex
features. However, this simple model runs fast and can be
used as a baseline model. Model 2 has two parallel deep
residual neural networks and each has 37 CNN layers. One
major difference between the two parallel deep residual
neural networks lies in different convolution kernels and
different filters. So they have variant receptive fields.

Another difference lies in the first two ResNet blocks of
both branches. One branch uses 1 dimensional CNN layers,
whereas another branch uses 2 dimensional CNN layers.
The 2 dimensional CNN layer is designed to make sure that
the same kernel walks through each lead and extract
features common to different leads. The ResNet like
structure has shortcuts that jump over different layers,
which can avoid the problem of vanishing gradients during
training and make full use of the features extracted by
different convolutional layers. Furthermore, SENet, which
won the first place in ILSVRC 2017 classification
challenge [15], recalibrates channel-wise feature
importance and makes the model more effective. So model
2 got much better performance than model 1.
Although XGBoost classifiers had made use of age, sex,
peak related features and deep features, their performance
was not as good as model 2. One possible reason is that
these features are not good enough to make a classifier with
high quality. Further features about frequency, HRV and
morphology may be required. The other reason is that we
used the default parameters to train XGBoost classifiers,
and these default parameters were not optimal, which
might lead to overfitting.
There are several limitations in our study. Firstly, an
ablation study has not been carried out. Our proposed
models are not optimal and could be further tuned.
Secondly, we trained our models on 10 s segments and
evaluated them on various long samples. It may attenuate
the overall performance. Thirdly, the generalization of our
models needs to be improved since they had a big
difference in performance on different databases of the
official test set.
In conclusion, the presented deep learning models
showed potential application value in automatically
classifying 12-lead ECG.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by University of Shanghai for
Science and Technology under Science and Technology
Development Project.

[15]

Wang G, Zhang C, Liu Y, et al. A global and updatable
ECG beat classification system based on recurrent
neural networks and active learning. Information
Sciences, 2019; 501:523-542.
Yildirim Ö. A novel wavelet sequence based on deep
bidirectional LSTM network model for ECG signal
classification. Computers in Biology and Medicine,
2018; 96:189-202.
Sannino G, De Pietro G. A deep learning approach for
ECG-based heartbeat classification for arrhythmia
detection. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2018;
86:446-455.
Al Rahhal MM, Bazi Y, Al Zuair M, et al.
Convolutional neural networks for electrocardiogram
classification. Journal of Medical & Biological
Engineering, 2018; 38:1014-1025.
Faust O, Shenfield A, Kareem M, et al. Automated
detection of atrial fibrillation using long short-term
memory network with RR interval signals, Computers
in Biology and Medicine, 2018; 102:327-335.
Xiong Z, Nash MP, Cheng E, et al. ECG signal
classification for the detection of cardiac arrhythmias
using a convolutional recurrent neural network,
Physiological Measurement, 2018; 39(9):094006.
Perez Alday EA, Gu A, Shah A, et al. Classification of
12-lead ECGs: the
PhysioNet/Computing in
Cardiology Challenge. Physiological Measurement,
2020 (Under Review).
Cai W, Hu D. QRS complex detection using novel deep
learning Neural Networks. IEEE Access, 2020;
8:97082-97089.
Pan J, Tompkins WJ. A real-time QRS detection
algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, 1985; 32(3):230-236.
Tan JH, Hagiwara Y, Pang W, et al. Application of
stacked convolutional and long short-term memory
network for accurate identification of CAD ECG
signals, Computers in Biology and Medicine, 2018;
94:19-26.
Chen T, Guestrin C. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting
system. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, 2016; San Francisco, California, USA.
Hu J, Shen L, Albanie S, et al. Squeeze-and-excitation
networks, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2020;42(8):2011-2023.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

Virani SS, Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, et al. Heart Disease
and Stroke Statistics-2020 Update: A report from the
American
Heart
Association.
Circulation,
2020;141(9):e1-e458.
Rautaharju PM. Eyewitness to history: Landmarks in
the development of computerized electrocardiography.
Journal of Electrocardiology, 2016; 49(1):1-6.
Hannun AY, Rajpurkar P, Haghpanahi M, et al.
Cardiologist-level
arrhythmia
detection
and
classification in ambulatory electrocardiograms using a
deep neural network. Nature Medicine, 2019; 25(1):6569.

Address for correspondence:
Wenjie Cai
School of Medical Instrument and Food Engineering,
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology,
516 Jungong Road, Yangpu Distric, Shanghai, China
wjcai@usst.edu.cn

